Alright! So, continuing on
in our out of ordinary
video for this section.
Let's now consider the
term EffectivelyFinal.
As of Java 8, you can use a local
variable in a local or anonymous class
that's declared in the enclosing code
as long as it's EffectivelyFinal.
I think the best way to explain
this is in a small bit of code,
let's create yet another class
in our fundamentals project.
I'm going to call
this EffectivelyFinal.
Okay, paste the code in.
So, this code's got the usual
main method, which declares a
local variable efinal as you
can see there, then it declares
a LocalClass that prints out
efinal which again is the local
variable from the enclosing scope.
So, if we run this,
we get the value of efinal equals one.
Now, I'm able to use efinal from
within the local class because it's
EffectivelyFinal, so it's declared and
assigned a value that never changes.
You can test if a variable
is EffectivelyFinal by
simply adding final to the
local variable declaration,
which i'll do up here now.
Run this,
it still works, and there's no compilation errors.
So, that's asserting that the
variable efinal is EffectivelyFinal.
I'll just undo that again,
so let's add a single statement
after that, efinal++; the
code now longer compiles.
Note that the error is on the usage
of efinal in the local class and not
with the code that I've added on line
15, but again, the error is needs
to be final or effectively final.
Right, so, I'm going to undo
that code, the code change there.
I'm going to try adding the same
line now, the efinal++ to the code
after the local class declaration.
So, basically down here efinal++
again, you're not going to
get the same compiler error.
It doesn't matter where you alter
efinal, if it's changed anywhere in
the enclosing code then the compiler
recognizes that it's not effectively
final, and will raise an error on the
reference of the variable in the local
class as you can see it doing here.
All right, so let's undo that so
the code is valid again.
For completeness sake,
let's try one other change.
Let's try changing the code in
the local class itself, so I'm
going to add a ++ as a post
increment, same error again, needs
to be final or effectively final.
Attempting to alter efinal within
the local class is considered
altering the efinal variable
from being effectively final.
undo this again, so it's valid.
So, next, let's have a look at
what happens when java compiles
source files with inner classes.
We're going to open our project
pane, and open the out folder,
and down here to fundamentals,
right-click and Open in Terminal.
They'll do a directory listing.
I'm on window, so I'm going to
do dir, ls for mac, or linux.
And looking at the code here,
we've got quite a few files there now.
You can see that class files
are generated for each of the
inner classes and named in
relationship to the enclosing class.
Now these are hidden by
default within intellij.
Alright, so let's exit here
to go back to intellij.
And what we can do is right-click
on the output folder, select
Mark Directory as, then
select Generated Sources Root.
You can see by doing that, we now
get a list of all the inner classes.
Alright!
Let's leave nested and inner classes
here, and return our attention to the
enum, and consider its construction
now in a little bit more detail.
Alright, so let's start create
another file here, another java
class, we'll call this one EnumExtras,
This is a basic enum in a class
that prints the values of the enum.
We'll run this, and you can see
the output below so far so good.
Let's add some initialization code to
the enum, next, so that we can examine
what order things are initialized.
Alright, so let's replace our
simple enum with a considerably
more complex example now.
What I've done is now set up an
initializer for each constant,
you can see the various initializers. they're commented.
Now each constant has a value in
parentheses associated with it, which
represents the constructor argument.
Now, Enum Body as we
scroll down there.
I've added a field named rating, we've
got a static initializer, there we've
also got a regular initializer, and
also a constructor that I talked
about, that sets the rating field.
Alright, so, let's just
replace our main method.
And you can see that I've
replaced the following
And now, instead I'm printing
each enum value individually.
I'm doing it this way to test
when the initialization of the
constants occurs and in what
order elements are initialized.
So, if we actually run this
now, and check the output.
From this, you can see the order
of creation for this entity called
Primary Color, which is our enum.
So, each anonymous class
which represents the enum
constant is initialized in
the order I defined them.
So, the initializer, I defined
in the enum body block,
if we have a look at that.
So, that's executed first, so you can
see that code executed on line 37.
So, next, the constructor is executed,
you can see our constructor there, and
the output on line 42 confirms that.
After the constructor, the
initializer I defined in the
enum constant block is executed.
And we can see that there, just
showing that's initialized and then
the output, the third line of output,
they're showing red initialized.
And that's the same for
the other colors as well.
Now, after all constants are
initialized, you can see that
the static initializer, if we
go down, have a look at that.
That's then executed, you can
see that down here, Enum Class
Initialization that's coming
from the static initializer.
So, this results in a set of instances
of anonymous classes which extend
the class, Primary Class which
each enum constant represents.
You can see that when references
are made to primary color .blue,
and primary color .yellow in the
main method, the initialization
process of the enum constants
and enum itself are not repeated.
Finally, let's explore
enums and interfaces.
So, an enum can implement
an interface, and I want
to demonstrate that next.
So, we need a new class for this.
Let's call this one TestEnumInterface.
This code starts up by declaring
an interface, DoItInterface
with a single method doIt.
Moving on down, you can see that
that we're declaring an enum
SecondaryColors which implements
the DoItInterface interface.
Now, the enum body has an
implementation of doIt, you
can see that on line 25.
This is required if all the enum
constants do not define a doIt method.
Note that the enum constant purple
has a body block that contains an
implementation for doIt that overrides
the one declared in the enum body.
Now, scrolling on down, we've
got our TestEnumInterface class.
You can see it contains a method, printData
that takes a parameter of type doIt interface,
and executes the doIt method.
Also, got a main method there that
calls printData for two of our
secondary colors, orange with the enum
body doIt implementation and purple,
which had its own doIt implementation.
And you can you can see that there.
So, running this, you'll
see the output there,
it's working as intended.
Now, if we go back up to our
enum, if we remove the doIt
method here, just delete that.
We've suddenly got two errors,
you can see there, one for each
of the constants orange and green.
And you can see, it's
telling us it must implement
the abstract method doIt.
And just to confirm that if
we actually replace our enum
definitions, we go back up to here.
Orange, and green, and purple, and
paste in some new code, each of
these now has its own doIt method
and the errors have now disappeared.
And if you run this, we find the
output is the same as what it
was before I made those changes.
So, your options when implementing
an interface on an enum is to
implement the method or methods on
each enum constant, or implement
the methods in the enum body.
And you can do a combination of
both if you define the interface
method or methods in the enum body.
So, you can see that you can
make an enum very complex, but
in general, it's best to keep
your enum declaration simple.
There are many compile-time errors
you can introduce in an enum.
Any of the items below will
result in a compile-time error.
Declaring a constructor in
an enum with the public or
protected access modifiers.
Using ‘super’ in a constructor.
Extending an enum.
Or, excluding the ; [semicolon]
after the constants list if the
enum has any statements in the body.
Alright, so in the last two videos,
what i've tried to do is show you
examples of code that you may have
not had much opportunity to exercise
with in your daily coding life.
And hopefully, enough questions
come up similar to this in the
exam, you'll be in a position
to be able to answer them.
So, next you'll be presented
with a couple of quiz questions
just to test your skills.
And then what we'll do is, we'll
move on to the next section,
and specifically, that's all
about exception handling.
So, see you in the next quiz and
then, ultimately, in the next section.